Review: The XMPP Newsletter June 2025 (#1535)
xsf/xmpp.org: content/blog/newsletter/2025-07-05-newsletter.md

---
title: The XMPP Newsletter June 2025
date: 2025-07-05
categories: ['Newsletter']
---

{{< figure src="/images/newsletter/xmpp_newsletter_banner.jpg" caption="XMPP Newsletter Banner" >}}

Welcome to the XMPP Newsletter, great to have you here again!
This issue covers the month of June 2025.

Like this newsletter, many projects and their efforts in the XMPP community are a result of people’s voluntary work. If you are happy with the services and software you may be using, please consider saying thanks or help these projects! Interested in supporting the Newsletter team? Read more [at the bottom](#help-us-to-build-the-newsletter).

## XSF Announcements

### XSF Membership

> If you are interested in joining the XMPP Standards Foundation as a member, [please apply until August 17th, 2025 00:00 UTC!](https://wiki.xmpp.org/web/Membership_Applications_Q3_2025).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are interested in joining the XMPP Standards Foundation as a member, [please apply before August 17th, 2025 00:00 UTC!](https://wiki.xmpp.org/web/Membership_Applications_Q3_2025).
```

Improve wording

## XMPP Events

> - [XMPP Italian happy hour](https://video.xmpp-it.net/c/happyhour/videos) [IT]: monthly Italian XMPP web meeting, every third Monday of the month at 7:00 PM local time (online event, with web meeting mode and live streaming).

Author: Applied.
Thank you!

## XMPP Software News

### XMPP Clients and Applications

- [Cheogram](https://cheogram.com/) has released version [2.17.10-2](https://git.sr.ht/~singpolyma/cheogram-android/refs/2.17.10-2) for Android.
- [Converse.js](https://conversejs.org/) has released version [11.0.1](https://github.com/conversejs/converse.js/releases/tag/v11.0.1) of its open-source and web-based XMPP chat client. The Desktop version can be downloaded from [here](https://github.com/conversejs/converse-desktop/releases). Make sure to check out the [release link](https://github.com/conversejs/converse.js/releases) for all the details!
- [Gajim](https://gajim.org/) has released version [2.3.0](https://gajim.org/posts/2025-06-29-gajim-2.3.0-released/) ( and [2.3.1](https://dev.gajim.org/gajim/gajim/-/releases/2.3.1) ) with a fresh new look featuring [Adwaita](https://gnome.pages.gitlab.gnome.org/libadwaita/), adding new features, improvements, quite a few changes and bug fixes. Head over to their [news section](https://gajim.org/posts/) for more information. And don't forget to read the [changelog](https://dev.gajim.org/gajim/gajim/-/blob/master/ChangeLog) for all the details!

> - [Libervia](https://libervia.org/) has received [NLnet](https://nlnet.nl/) funding to 'Implement serverless (with RELOAD) and reduce metadata exposure' ([Serverless and Metadata Reduction for XMPP](https://nlnet.nl/project/ServerlessXMPP/)). This project will reduce metadata exposure and enable decentralized, serverless communication. Work will focus on encrypting roster (contact list) information by implementing changes in the Libervia ecosystem through [Tor](https://www.torproject.org/) integration to anonymize connections and reduce IP tracking, as well as roster end-to-end encryption. A second focus area is advancing serverless communication by implementing the RELOAD protocol [XEP-0415](/extensions/xep-0415.html) leveraging end-to-end authentication via [XEP-0416](/extensions/xep-0416.html) and [XEP-0417](/extensions/xep-0417.html). This project strengthens XMPP and Libervia’s privacy and availability, enabling their use in environments where servers may be unavailable or inaccessible.

Reviewer 2: A bit of rephrasing to avoid overly long sentences
```suggestion
- [Libervia](https://libervia.org/) has received [NLnet](https://nlnet.nl/) funding to 'Implement serverless (with RELOAD) and reduce metadata exposure' ([Serverless and Metadata Reduction for XMPP](https://nlnet.nl/project/ServerlessXMPP/)). This project will reduce metadata exposure and enable decentralized, serverless communication. Work will focus on end-to-end encryption specs for roster (contact list) information. These changes will be implemented in the Libervia ecosystem through [Tor](https://www.torproject.org/) integration, which will help anonymize connections and reduce IP tracking. A second focus area is advancing serverless communication by implementing the RELOAD protocol [XEP-0415](/extensions/xep-0415.html) and leveraging end-to-end authentication via [XEP-0416](/extensions/xep-0416.html) and [XEP-0417](/extensions/xep-0417.html). This project will strengthen XMPP and Libervia’s privacy and availability, enabling their use in environments where servers may be unavailable or inaccessible.
```

- [Monocles](https://monocles.eu/) has released versions [2.0.8](https://codeberg.org/monocles/monocles_chat/releases/tag/CodebergRelease-v2.0.8), [2.0.9](https://codeberg.org/monocles/monocles_chat/releases/tag/CodebergRelease-v2.0.9), [2.0.10](https://codeberg.org/monocles/monocles_chat/releases/tag/CodebergRelease-v2.0.10) and [2.0.11](https://codeberg.org/monocles/monocles_chat/releases/tag/CodebergRelease-v2.0.11) of its chat client for Android, featuring many new functions and fixes.
- [Prose](https://prose.org/) has released versions [0.10.2](https://github.com/prose-im/prose-app-web/releases/tag/0.10.2) and [0.11.0](https://github.com/prose-im/prose-app-web/releases/tag/0.11.0) of its web frontend [prose-web-app](https://github.com/prose-im/prose-app-web).

### XMPP Servers

> - The [Ignite Realtime community](https://www.igniterealtime.org/) is thrilled to announce the release of the latest versions of their popular open-source XMPP server. [Openfire 5.0.0](https://discourse.igniterealtime.org/t/openfire-5-0-0-a-new-era-of-real-time-communication/95627) just came out, immediately followed by [Openfire 5.0.1](https://discourse.igniterealtime.org/t/openfire-5-0-1-release-our-100th-maybe/95667) which should be its drop-in replacement. The new releases come packed with a host of new features, improvements, and bug fixes that enhance its performance, security, and usability. You can download Openfire 5.0.1 straight from the [website](https://www.igniterealtime.org/projects/openfire/) and read the [documentation](https://www.igniterealtime.org/projects/openfire/documentation.jsp) to get started. Don't forget to check out the [changelog](https://download.igniterealtime.org/openfire/docs/latest/changelog.html) for a lists of all the changes that have been made!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The [Ignite Realtime community](https://www.igniterealtime.org/) is thrilled to announce the release of the latest versions of their popular open-source XMPP server. [Openfire 5.0.0](https://discourse.igniterealtime.org/t/openfire-5-0-0-a-new-era-of-real-time-communication/95627) just came out, immediately followed by [Openfire 5.0.1](https://discourse.igniterealtime.org/t/openfire-5-0-1-release-our-100th-maybe/95667) which should be its drop-in replacement. The new releases come packed with a host of new features, improvements, and bug fixes that enhance its performance, security, and usability. You can download Openfire 5.0.1 straight from the [website](https://www.igniterealtime.org/projects/openfire/) and read the [documentation](https://www.igniterealtime.org/projects/openfire/documentation.jsp) to get started. Don't forget to check out the [changelog](https://download.igniterealtime.org/openfire/docs/latest/changelog.html) for a list of all the changes that have been made!
```

Grammar fix.

> - The [Ignite Realtime community](https://www.igniterealtime.org/) is thrilled to announce the release of [Openfire 5.0.0](https://discourse.igniterealtime.org/t/openfire-5-0-0-a-new-era-of-real-time-communication/95627), ( immediately followed by the release of [Openfire 5.0.1](https://discourse.igniterealtime.org/t/openfire-5-0-1-release-our-100th-maybe/95667) which should be a drop-in replacement for version 5.0.0 ) the latest version of their popular open-source XMPP (Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol) server. This new release comes packed with a host of new features, improvements, and bug fixes that enhance its performance, security, and usability. You can download Openfire 5.0.1 straight from the [website](https://www.igniterealtime.org/projects/openfire/) and read the [documentation](https://www.igniterealtime.org/projects/openfire/documentation.jsp) to get started. Don't forget to check out the [changelog](https://download.igniterealtime.org/openfire/docs/latest/changelog.html) for a lists of all the changes that have been made!

Reviewer 2: Rephrased to better describe both releases coming at once (and also incidentally got rid of a pair of parentheses that had an extra space inside)
```suggestion
- The [Ignite Realtime community](https://www.igniterealtime.org/) is thrilled to announce the release of the latest versions of their popular open-source XMPP server. [Openfire 5.0.0](https://discourse.igniterealtime.org/t/openfire-5-0-0-a-new-era-of-real-time-communication/95627) just came out, immediately followed by [Openfire 5.0.1](https://discourse.igniterealtime.org/t/openfire-5-0-1-release-our-100th-maybe/95667) which should be its drop-in replacement. The new releases come packed with a host of new features, improvements, and bug fixes that enhance its performance, security, and usability. You can download Openfire 5.0.1 straight from the [website](https://www.igniterealtime.org/projects/openfire/) and read the [documentation](https://www.igniterealtime.org/projects/openfire/documentation.jsp) to get started. Don't forget to check out the [changelog](https://download.igniterealtime.org/openfire/docs/latest/changelog.html) for a lists of all the changes that have been made!
```

- [Recuperando a soberania e a privacidade da sua comunicação pessoal e corporativa](https://dev.to/isafashiondev/recuperando-a-soberania-e-a-privacidade-da-sua-comunicacao-pessoal-e-corporativa-id3) by [Isadora Ribeiro](https://dev.to/isafashiondev). [PT_BR]
- [Mitigating MITMs in XMPP](https://blog.jmp.chat/b/mitigating-mitms-in-xmpp) by [Amolith](xmpp:amolith@secluded.site) for the [JMP Blog](https://blog.jmp.chat/).
- [Openfire 5.0.0: A New Era of Real-Time Communication](https://discourse.igniterealtime.org/t/openfire-5-0-0-a-new-era-of-real-time-communication/95627) by the [Ignite Realtime community](https://www.igniterealtime.org/).
- [Setting up Slidge Gateway with Openfire for use with Whatsapp, Matrix and Telegram](https://discourse.igniterealtime.org/t/setting-up-slidge-gateway-with-openfire-for-use-with-whatsapp-matrix-telegram/95656/1) by surfbum for the [Ignite Realtime Community](https://www.igniterealtime.org/).
- [Per-application passwords in Tigase](https://tigase.org/blog/tigase-per-app-credentials/) from the [Tigase Posts](https://tigase.org/posts/).

> 

Reviewer 2: Last-minute addition by Mari0 on the pad (and groupchat); adding a mildly edited version here to make it easier to pull in

```suggestion
- [Join the XMPP-IT Community: Your Help Matters!](https://www.xmpp-it.net/2025/07/05/roughnecks/collabora-con-noi/) The XMPP-IT community is launching a call for active collaboration — no need to be an expert, and it’s not paid work, just shared participation. From translations to testing software, writing wiki content or contributing code, there’s room for everyone. [IT]
```
